## A proposal to efficiently calculate $\mathbf{A}_{22}$

Calculation of numerical relationship matrix $\mathbf{A}$ can be easy when the pedigree size is small. In such circumstance,  $\mathbf{A}$ can be fitted in RAM of a computer.  The total computation is approximate $n^2/2$ add and $n^2$ multiplication operations. 

For an ordered pedigree `ped`, where row numbers are ID numbers. Then below is a sample function to calculate $\mathbf{A}$.

```julia
using LinearAlgebra, DataFrames
function Amat(ped; m = 1000)
    N = nrow(ped)]ac	
    N > m && error("Pedigree size ($N > $m) too big")
    A = zeros(N, N) + I(N)
    for (i, (pa, ma, ..)) in enumerate(eachrow(ped))
        pa * ma != 0 && (A[i, i] += .5A[pa, ma])
        for j in 1:i-1
            pa != 0 && (A[i, j]  = 0.5A[j, pa])
            ma != 0 && (A[i, j] += 0.5A[j, ma])
            A[j, i] = A[i, j]
        end
    end
    A
end
```

There are often huge pedigrees in reality after decades of modern breeding practice. For example, we are currently dealing with with a pig pedigree with $N=$ 4,957,544 ID and up to 39 generations. The full $\mathbf{A}$ matrix will require $N^2\times8/1024^4 \approx$ 179 TiB. Few computers have such huge memory. Such $\mathbf{A}$ is also hard to store on hard drives.

$\mathbf{A}^{-1}$, which is sparse, only needs a few GiB for the above pedigree. It also takes no more than 90 minutes to calculate $\mathbf{A}^{-1}$ through the $\mathbf{A}^{-1} = (\mathbf{T}^{-1})'\mathbf{D}^{-1}\mathbf{T}^{-1}$ way.

The dense property of a $\mathbf{A}$ matrix also makes it difficult to extract a sub matrix from it. For example, we might want to extract the corresponding $\mathbf{A}_{22}$ of 170,293 genotyped animals. $\mathbf{A}_{22}$ is, however, critical for one-step genomic selection programs.

Here, I propose the following way to calculate a $\mathbf{A}_{22}$.

### Reduce the pedigree
The relationships among ID of $\mathbf{A}_{22}$, I call these ID of set 2 later, are only determined by their ancestors. It is then reasonable to remove ID who are not in line of set 2 from the pedigree. The sample codes are as below:

```julia
function effID(ped, idc, lst)
    epp = Set{Int}()
    id = Set{Int}()
    for s in lst
        push!(id, idc[s])
    end
    ng = 1
    while !isempty(id)
        union!(epp, unique(id))
        pm = Set{Int}()
        ng += 1
        for i in id
            ped.pa[i] == 0 || push!(pm, ped.pa[i])
            ped.ma[i] == 0 || push!(pm, ped.ma[i])
        end
        id = pm
        @show ng, length(epp), length(pm)
    end
    sort(collect(epp))
end
```

### Calculate $\mathbf{A}$ with disk map
This procedure only takes about 1 or two seconds. The shrinked pedigree is of size 690,755. The storage of $\mathbf{A}$ needed for these ID are then $690755^2\times8/1024^4 \approx$ 3.47TiB.  With the Julia `Mmap` package, it is easy to store such a matrix on a hard disk, and then map the matrix into memory. The total calculation time is then approximate reading and writing once of such a matrix. A typical spinning hard disk has a writing speed about 100MiB per second. It takes about 10 hours to write sequentially of the 3.47TiB data to the disk. To add some other factors which might slow down the process, the total calculation may be just one or two days.
